# Scanner

The main part of ComicLib is only responsible for traversing the comic library. The judgment and analysis of comic files are all completed through scanners.

Scanners are divided into [built-in scanners](https://github.com/ComicLib/comiclib/tree/master/comiclib/scanner) and external scanners. All *.py files in the working directory will be loaded as external scanners.

For each candidate comic file (folder), scanners are executed sequentially in the order of the file name (regardless of whether it is built-in or not) to complete different tasks, like an assembly line.

You can find some external scanners in the [official repository](https://github.com/ComicLib/scanner), or download those written by others. In addition, you can write it by yourself as long as you know some simple Python.

By default, in addition to scanning once at startup, the comic library will also be monitored at runtime.
Comics that have been scanned into the database will be skipped.
See [Settings](settings.md) to change the behavior.

## Built-in scanners

### 10-zip.py

Treat *.zip files as comic files.

### 11-archive.py

Treat regular archived files, except zip, as comic files.
It requires 7-Zip, download it from [https://7-zip.org/download.html](https://7-zip.org/download.html) and make sure 7zzs or 7zz or 7z is in the working directory or the directory indicated by PATH. 7-Zip obtained from some other sources may not support rar files.

### 20-ccloli.py

Parse comic files downloaded via [ccloli/E-Hentai-Downloader](https://github.com/ccloli/E-Hentai-Downloader).


### 21-hath.py

Parse comic folders downloaded via [Hentai@Home](https://ehwiki.org/wiki/Hentai@Home#H.40H_Downloader).

### 22-ehviewer.py

Parse comic folders downloaded via [EhViewer](https://github.com/seven332/EhViewer).

### 30-importEHdb.py

Import the corresponding metadata from [ehentai metadata database](https://sukebei.nyaa.si/user/gipaf23445).
The database api_dump.sqlite must be downloaded to the working directory before use, otherwise it will be skipped.

Environment variable settings:

| Environment variables | Description | Default value |
| ------- | ---- | ----- |
| `importEHdb_thumb` | Whether to import thumbnails from it (`True`/`False`) | `True` |
| `importEHdb_matchtitle` | Whether to match based on the title (`True`/`False`/`exact`), `exact` for exact matching, `True` for fuzzy matching | `True` |
| `importEHdb_matchtorrent` | Whether to match based on the torrent file names (`True`/`False`) | `True` |

Matching based on ehentai gid is always enabled.

### 40-thumb.py

Generate homepage thumbnails from comic files.

## Write your own scanners

Since scanners determine the order of execution based on file names, a number can be added at the beginning of the file name.
General agreement:

* Scanners starting with 1 determine whether it is a comic file based on the file type, and perform basic analysis (such as using the file name as the title and counting the number of pages);
* Scanners starting with 2 parse metadata of files downloaded through specific downloaders;
* Scanners starting with 3 perform post-processing on the previously obtained metadata;
* Scanners starting with 4 are responsible for generating thumbnails.

The basic structure of scanners is as follows
``` python
from pathlib import Path
from typing import Union
from pydantic import Field
from pydantic_settings import BaseSettings
# some import and pre-process
# this may be executed multiple times, thus should avoid things like opening files

# optional
class Settings(BaseSettings):
    myscanner_settingA: bool = True  # It is recommended to prefix with the scanner name
    myscanner_settingB: Union[bool, str] = Field(default=True, union_mode='left_to_right')
settings = Settings()

class Scanner:
    '''Your docstrings'''

    # optional
    def __init__(self) -> None:
        # Some initializations will only be executed once
    
    def scan(self, path: Path, id: str, metadata: dict, prev_scanners: list[str]) -> bool:
        # Process each file/directory
        if xxx:
            ...
            return True
        else:
            return False
```
where `Scanner.scan` is the function that actually scans each file/directory.

The return value indicates whether the scanners were successfully processed (e.g. the file/directory is considered a valid comic, or whether there is modified metadata).
If all scripts get `False` after scanning, ComicLib considers that the file/directory is not a valid comic and will not save it in the database.
This return value is also used as a reference for subsequent scripts.

Parameters of `Scanner.scan`:

* `path`: file/directory path for the input comic.
* `id`: The unique ID pre-generated by ComicLib, which is a hash of the relative path to `CONTENT`. The database uses the ID given by `metadata[id]` instead, see the description of custom ID below.
* `metadata`: Metadata obtained after processing by the previous script. The fields include `id`, `title`, `subtitle` `source`, `pagecount`, `tags`, `categories`. The initial values are `None` or `set()`, except for `id`. scanners write the resulting metadata into this `dict`.
* `prev_scanners`: The name of the script that previously returned `True`.

!!! example "custom ID (Experimental)"
    ComicLib first pre-generates a unique ID based on the path, starting with `00` as the value of the parameter `id`. Initially this ID is the same as `metadata[id]`.
    The scanner can generate a new ID based on `id`, `metadata[id]` modified by the previous scanning script and other information, and write it into `metadata[id]`.
    It is generally agreed that the first several characters of the ID represent the meaning of the ID. For example, the built-in scanner uses `EH` to represent its designed ID with ehentai gid information.
    The final `metadata[id]` is written to the database as a unique identifier for the comic.
    ID must be unique, and be 40 characters. Custom IDs will not work for updating metadata during rescanning
